[Proposal] Readonly setter calls on non-variables (#9175)
dotnet/csharplang: proposals/readonly-setter-calls-on-non-variables.md

# Readonly setter calls on non-variables

Champion issue: <https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/issues/9174>

## Summary

Permits a readonly setter to be called on _all_ non-variable expressions:

```cs
var c = new C();
// Remove the current CS1612 error, because ArraySegment<T>.this is readonly:
c.ArraySegmentProp[10] = new object();

> // The same restriction has *already* been lifted for invocation expressions:

Author: Oh, thanks for clarifying. This is really what I was asking when I asked "is it a compiler bug that the restriction was lifted for invocations but not for all expressions."

> // The same restriction has *already* been lifted for invocation expressions:

Reviewer: I honestly wasn't sure until that comment where I thought to debug through the code

c.ArraySegmentMethod()[10] = new object();

class C
{
    public ArraySegment<object> ArraySegmentProp { get; set; }
    public ArraySegment<object> ArraySegmentMethod() => ArraySegmentProp;

> }

Reviewer: Another example to consider here is a `readonly struct` that has a `ref` returning indexer. That shows another way that we support getting around this limitation. The only reason that a `readonly struct` can't universally just take that approach is that some data storage backing, like if you backed your `readonly struct` with `List<T>` vs. `T[]` is the former doesn't have a great way at getting `ref` to the values.

```

> Currently, the code above gives the error CS1612 "Cannot modify the return value of 'C.ArraySegmentProp' because it is not a variable." This restriction is meaningless when the setter is readonly. The restriction is there to remind you to assign the modified struct value back to the property. But there is no modification to the struct value when the setter is readonly, so there is no reason to assign back to the property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, the code above gives the error CS1612 "Cannot modify the return value of 'C.ArraySegmentProp' because it is not a variable." This restriction is unnecessary when the setter is readonly. The restriction is there to remind you to assign the modified struct value back to the property. But there is no supported modification to the struct value when the setter is readonly, so there is no reason to assign back to the property.
```

Suggest softening the language a bit. There are scenarios where mutations could occur, like `unsafe`, but they're not really in the realm of supported for these type of considerations.

```cs
var c = new C();

// Proposal: no error because the indexer's set accessor is readonly.
c.SimulatedNamedIndexer[42] = new object();

class C
{
    public WrapperStruct SimulatedNamedIndexer => new(this);

    public readonly struct WrapperStruct(C c)
    {
        public object this[int index]
        {
            // Indexer accesses private state or calls private methods in 'C'
            get => ...;
            set => ...;
        }
    }
}
```

This addresses recurring community requests. These requests are often around document object models, entity component systems, numerics and geometry, and other modeling scenarios, but sometimes more ordinary helpers or utilities. This is the common thread: folks would like to not have to declare a pair of accessor methods when the accessors would make logical sense together as a single property or indexer. And, they don't want a class wrapper providing the API, they want a readonly struct wrapper.

```cs
// Undesirable:
c.SetXyz("key", c.GetXyz("key") + 1);

// Desirable:
c.Xyz["key"]++;
```

> The only thing that is blocking these use cases is a misappplied error that has not been fully updated with an understanding of readonly structs or readonly members.

Reviewer: Soften

Then, the v8 spec is still in draft and the updates for readonly members have not yet merged. When it merges, it will need to redefine the condition as whether the setter itself is readonly, directly or indirectly.

### Spec updates

This proposal would remove the text "**and the instance expression is an invocation**" from the paragraph mentioned above in [Waiting for v8 and corrected v7 specification](#waiting-for-v8-and-corrected-v7-specification).

## Expansions

There's another location where this kind of assignment is blocked, which is in object initializers:

```cs
// ❌ CS1918 Members of property 'C.ArraySegmentProp' of type 'ArraySegment<object>' cannot be assigned with an object
// initializer because it is of a value type
_ = new C { ArraySegmentProp = { [42] = new object() } };
//          ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

class C
{
    public ArraySegment<object> ArraySegmentProp { get; set; }
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Also for ref properties.

```cs
_ = new C
{
  // CS1918
  S = { Prop = "abc" }
};
public class C {
    private S _s;
    public ref S S => ref _s;
}
public struct S
{
    public string Prop {get; set; }
}
```
